# Study 1: Measure Development

To assess future self complementarity, we developed and validated a methodology to capture future selves as networks of future-oriented cognitive representations. We sought to present participants with a list of representations, from which they could select the ones that apply to their future self. This ensures that cognitive representations reside at the same level of abstraction, align closely with our theoretical framework, and are comparable between participants and over time. In Study 1a, we generated a list of possible cognitive representations contained within future selves. Participants would select representations that apply to their future self from this list and report on the level of mutually beneficial connections among these representations. This resulted in their individual future self network, which formed the basis for calculating the complementarity measure. In Study 1b, we then established that future self complementarity is distinct from related concepts. 

# Study 1a: Generating a List of Future-Oriented Cognitive Representations

Procedure and Sample. To generate the list of possible cognitive representations contained in a future self, we adapted the procedure employed by Schleicher and McConnell (2005), who used an open-ended self-description task to elicit cognitive representations of the self. Correspondingly, we first asked participants to mentally travel into the future and think about their future self, using the instructions soliciting future selves in relation to work by Strauss et al. (2012). They were then asked to list up to 10 descriptions of their future self in each of the following categories: visual appearance of their future self; social, organizational, professional, political, societal, or ethnic groups their future self belongs to; relationships their future self has with others; how their future self would be seen or described by others; emotions or feelings their future self experiences; actions or behaviors their future self engages in, alone and with others; traits, abilities, and personality attributes of 

their future self; events their future self has experienced; and, finally, their future self's physical surroundings. 

We recruited participants via Prolific, an online research subject pool developed specifically for the scientific community. Our sample consisted of 50 participants based in the United Kingdom with a mean age of 36 years (standard deviation $(SD) = 10.3$ ); $70\%$ identified as female and $30\%$ identified as male; and $60\%$ had completed a college or university degree. Participants worked in a range of professions, the most frequent being business-related services $(32\%)$ ; management $(14\%)$ ; healthcare $(12\%)$ ; arts, humanities, and education $(8\%)$ ; IT and scientific services $(8\%)$ ; and food and hospitality $(8\%)$ . 

Analysis and Results. Participants generated 5,432 cognitive representations. Three of the authors coded these representations with the aim of capturing the most common representations while maintaining the breadth of representations that individuals imagine for their future self. In an iterative process, we took turns in going through the list of representations, either confirming codes or suggesting alternative ones. We resolved any remaining disagreements by discussing the representations one-by-one. In the first coding step, we grouped similar representations under a single code; for example, "calm", "relaxed", "comfortable", "less anxious", "serenity", "peace", "at ease", and similar expressions were grouped together as "calm and relaxed". To keep the list of future-oriented cognitive representations to a manageable length for research participants, we opted for broader descriptions capturing related ideas (e.g., "learns something new/studies/develops skills"). Where participants listed specific and relatively rare examples, we used a broader description to capture their representations. For instance, within the social categories and groups the future self would belong to, descriptions such as "feminist", "vegan", "nationalist", or "humanist" occurred only once and were thus summarized under "identifies with a political or ideological group". Similarly, individual professions (e.g., "lawyer", "engineer", "film maker") were summarized as "identifies with their specific field or profession". Representations that appeared nonsensical (e.g., "great behaviors") or trivial (e.g., "showering") were removed (376 such representations were dropped). The final list contained 206 future cognitive representations (see Online Supplement S1). To ensure that this list sufficiently captures most future self representations that individuals may have, we conducted an additional validation study in a population-representative sample of 301 adults in the United Kingdom (see Online Supplement S3). 

# Study 1b: Discriminant Validity of Future Self Complementarity

Having developed a list of future-oriented cognitive representations—that is, the network nodes—we 

proceeded to establish that future self complementarity is distinct from conceptually related concepts. We thus examined the discriminant validity of future self complementarity. 

Procedure and Sample. We recruited 179 native English speakers based in the United Kingdom through Prolific. We excluded 21 participants who incorrectly answered an attention-check item, leaving a final sample of 158 (60.8% female, 38.6% male; one participant chose not to disclose their gender). The mean age was 35 years $(SD = 9.5)$ , and $62.7\%$ had completed a college or university degree. Participants worked in a range of professions, the most frequent being business-related services $(21\%)$ . They received $9.40 for completing the survey. 

Future Self Complementarity. Future self complementarity was captured as the overall level of mutually beneficial connections within a participant's future self network. To construct the future self network, participants were first presented with the list of 206 possible cognitive representations in random order. They initially selected all representations applicable to their future self. They then selected up to 25 representations<sup>3</sup> that they considered most important to their future self. 

Next, participants rated the extent to which each pair of representations had a helpful effect on each other on a 5-point scale ranging from $-2$ (Very harmful) through 0 (No effect) to $+2$ (Very helpful) (cf. Brook et al. 2008). We considered the relationships between representations as bidirectional—that is, if A has a helpful effect on B, B will also have a helpful effect on A—in line with extant theory on identity conflict and enhancement (e.g., Ramarajan et al. 2017b) and with conceptualizing future selves as associative networks of representations. We then constructed the future self network from these responses. We operationalized future self complementarity as the valued density of the network of helpful relationships, recoding ties rated as harmful or very harmful as 0 and retaining ties that were rated as helpful $(+1)$ or very helpful $(+2)$ . We computed valued density as the average of all ties in the resulting network (Wasserman and Faust 1994). Future self complementarity could then take values between zero and two. 

Future Self Conflict. We also computed a measure of future self conflict—that is, the overall level of conflict between cognitive representations. To do so, we constructed a network of harmful relationships among the representations for each participant, here recoding each tie reported as harmful $(-1)$ to 1, each very harmful tie $(-2)$ to 2, and coding all other ties as 0. We then computed the valued density of this network as a measure of future self conflict. 

In our data, conflictual relationships were rare, making up only $1.54\%$ of all relationships between representations. Although our focus is on future self representations rather than on identities, this finding is in line with previous research which shows that conflict between identities occurs much less frequently than enhancement between identities (Ramarajan et al. 2017a, b). The low prevalence of conflictual relationships limits the ability of future self conflict to predict outcomes. Nevertheless, we intended to evaluate the effects of future self complementarity over and above future self conflict and therefore control for future self conflict in all analyses. 

Conceptually Related Concepts. We sought to establish that future self complementarity is distinct from concepts reflecting clarity in relation to the current or future self or career. Unless otherwise noted, participants responded to all measures below on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). 

To establish that future self complementarity is distinct from having a clear and consistent view of one's self, we measured self-concept clarity $(\alpha = 0.92)$ with the 12-item scale by Campbell et al. (1996); sample item: "In general, I have a clear sense of who I am and what I am." We further sought to differentiate future self complementarity from vocational identity, having a clear idea of one's career goals, interests, and abilities (Holland et al. 1980b). Although a clear view of the self or of one's future career may render cognitive representations of the future self more accessible in the working memory, their level of complementarity is distinct. Vocational identity $(\alpha = 0.90)$ was assessed with 18 items by Holland et al. (1980a; sample item: "I am not sure that my present occupational choice or job is right for me.") Participants are required to make a True or False choice; the count of False responses is considered the vocational identity score, with a higher score indicating a higher level of vocational identity. 

To differentiate future self complementarity from the extent to which a future self is clear and easy to imagine, we included future self salience (Strauss et al. 2012). Whereas salience may reflect how easily people create mental simulations of their imagined future, complementarity captures how the different representations they imagine relate to each other. A future self that is clear and easily accessible in a person's mind can motivate efforts to actively shape the future in relation to work (e.g., Strauss et al. 2012, Guan et al. 2014). But a clear future self may not be complementary. In a complementary future self, the different representations, such as envisioned activities, interactions, etc., are mutually beneficial. In contrast, a lack of complementarity would reflect fragmented scenarios of the future which may still be clear and easy to 

imagine, yet not confer the benefits of complementarity. Future self salience $(\alpha = 0.93)$ was assessed with five items by Strauss et al. (2012). A sample item was "The mental image of this future is very clear." 

We further included career identity, the centrality of an individual's career to their self-definition (Carson and Bedeian 1994), and career aspiration, the extent to which they aspire to advancement in their career (O'Brien 1996). Both motivational career concepts are associated with a clearer vision of one's desired future self (Strauss et al. 2012). They are likely to be related to, yet distinct from, future self complementarity. Specifically, identifying strongly with one's career and striving for advancement may contribute to future self representations being crystalized around specific career goals, potentially promoting complementarity. Yet, complementarity captures a distinct quality: even if an individual strongly identifies with their career and its advancement, the representations within their future self may or may not be mutually beneficial. We measured career identity $(\alpha = 0.89)$ with four items by Carson and Bedeian (1994). A sample item was "I strongly identify with my chosen career line." Career aspirations $(\alpha = 0.81)$ were assessed with five items by O'Brien (1996). A sample item was "I hope to become a leader in my career field." 

We also sought to differentiate future self complementarity from future orientation, the dispositional tendency to consider the future rather than immediate outcomes (Strathman et al. 1994), an established correlate of future self salience (Strauss et al. 2012). Individuals with a strong future orientation may spend more time considering the cognitive representations of their future self, providing them with more opportunities to build mutually beneficial relationships between them. However, considering future outcomes is distinct from the level of complementarity between representations. We assessed future orientation $(\alpha = 0.70)$ with the six-item measure by Strauss et al. (2012), which is based on Strathman et al. (1994). A sample item was "I consider how things might be in the future, and try to influence those things with my day-to-day behavior." 

Finally, we included career adaptability and proactive career behaviors for an initial test of their relationship with future self complementarity. Career adaptability $(\alpha = 0.91)$ was measured with the 24-item scale by Savickas and Porfeli (2012), which captures individuals' self-regulatory strengths to adapt to career transitions and setbacks. Participants rate how strongly they have developed each strength on a 5-point scale ranging from Not strong (1) to Strongest (5). Example items are "Preparing for the future" (concern), "Making decisions by myself" (control), "Becoming curious about new opportunities" (curiosity), and "Overcoming obstacles" (confidence). We measured proactive career behavior 

$(\alpha = 0.89)$ with nine items by Strauss et al. (2012), which were based on Claes and Ruiz-Quintanilla (1998), reflecting career consultation (i.e., informally seeking career advice), networking, and proactive skill development (i.e., the development of skills which may be useful in future positions). A sample item was "I develop knowledge and skill in tasks critical to my future work life." 

Results and Discussion. Table 1 shows descriptive statistics and correlations. Participants initially selected an average of 87 representations for their future self in the first step and an average of 18 representations that they considered to be most important for their future self in the second step. 

Future self complementarity was not related to measures which capture clarity rather than complementarity—that is, to future self salience, self-concept clarity, or to vocational identity. It was also not significantly related to career identity, career aspirations, or future orientation. This provides support for its distinct nature. Importantly, future self complementarity was significantly related to career adaptability ( $r = 0.27$ , $p < 0.001$ ) and proactive career behavior ( $r = 0.19$ , $p = 0.01$ ).<sup>4</sup> 

In this initial study, we found preliminary support for the distinct quality of future self complementarity. Our results showed that the extent of mutually beneficial connections between the representations individuals imagine for their future self is distinct from having a clear image of one's future self or future career. In Study 2, we then proceeded to formally test our hypotheses. 

# Study 2

# Procedure and Sample

We recruited participants from a range of different sectors in Belgium. Participating organizations were recruited by a call on a human resources (HR) discussion group on LinkedIn that invited companies to participate in a study on future-oriented thinking in organizations. Eleven organizations took part in the study: two banks, three HR services providers, two research institutions, a city council, a waste recycling company, a dredging company, and an insurance company. In each participating company, the HR manager sent out an invitation for the study to employees. In return for their participation, all participants received a customized feedback report visually depicting their own future self network and providing relevant career tips. 

Participants completed an initial survey, including the future self assessment, at Time 1, and two weeks later were invited to a second survey which assessed career adaptability and proactive career behavior. At Time 1, 676 participants responded, and of these, 


Table 1. Study 1b: Descriptive Statistics and Intercorrelations


<table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>n</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>8</td><td>9</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>12</td><td>13</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>1. Age</td><td>158</td><td>34.97</td><td>9.5</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2. Gender (0 = male, 1 = female)</td><td>157</td><td>0.61</td><td>0.49</td><td>-0.14</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3. Education</td><td>158</td><td>5.18</td><td>1.18</td><td>-0.08</td><td>0.25**</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. Initial number of representations</td><td>158</td><td>86.63</td><td>41.00</td><td>-0.28***</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.15</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5. Future self network size</td><td>158</td><td>18.08</td><td>7.01</td><td>-0.30***</td><td>0</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.59***</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6. Future self complementarity</td><td>158</td><td>1.12</td><td>0.4</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.07</td><td>-0.1</td><td>0.03</td><td>-0.12</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7. Future self conflict</td><td>158</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.04</td><td>-0.19*</td><td>-0.06</td><td>0.02</td><td>0.17*</td><td>0.16</td><td>-0.11</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8. Future self salience</td><td>158</td><td>3.46</td><td>1.04</td><td>0.21**</td><td>0.12</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.03</td><td>-0.02</td><td>0.14</td><td>-0.03</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>9. Career identity</td><td>158</td><td>3.52</td><td>1.06</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.11</td><td>-0.01</td><td>0</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.06</td><td>0.43***</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10. Career aspirations</td><td>158</td><td>3.59</td><td>0.92</td><td>-0.17*</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.20*</td><td>0.29***</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.10</td><td>0.27***</td><td>0.29***</td><td>0.39***</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>11. Future orientation</td><td>158</td><td>3.64</td><td>0.59</td><td>-0.1</td><td>-0.01</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.09</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.37***</td><td>0.18*</td><td>0.42***</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12. Vocational identity</td><td>158</td><td>0.55</td><td>0.29</td><td>0.33***</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.04</td><td>-0.07</td><td>-0.15</td><td>-0.01</td><td>-0.12</td><td>0.53***</td><td>0.32***</td><td>0.13</td><td>0.13</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>13. Self-concept clarity</td><td>158</td><td>3.12</td><td>0.93</td><td>0.24**</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>-0.08</td><td>-0.14</td><td>0.04</td><td>-0.07</td><td>0.35***</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.59***</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>14. Career adaptability</td><td>158</td><td>3.30</td><td>0.59</td><td>-0.02</td><td>-0.03</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.26***</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.50***</td><td>0.25**</td><td>0.41***</td><td>0.48***</td><td>0.27***</td><td>0.22**</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15. Proactive career behavior</td><td>158</td><td>3.50</td><td>0.84</td><td>-0.07</td><td>0.12</td><td>0.12</td><td>0.26**</td><td>0.1</td><td>0.19*</td><td>0.12</td><td>0.55***</td><td>0.40***</td><td>0.56***</td><td>0.37***</td><td>0.31***</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.58***</td></tr></table>


$^{*}p <   0.05$ $^{**}p <   0.01$ $^{**}p <   0.001$ 


557 $(83.9\%)$ responded at Time 2. $^{6}$ Although we did not include attention checks in this study, we excluded two participants whose future self conflict scores were 13.0 and 13.7 standard deviations above the mean, respectively, resulting in a final sample of 565 participants. $^{7}$ In this sample, $58.9\%$ identified as female and $40.2\%$ as male; five participants indicated other gender identities or did not disclose. Of the participants, $40\%$ held a position without supervisory responsibilities, $13.1\%$ were first-level supervisors, $19.3\%$ were middle management, $16.6\%$ were upper middle management, $8\%$ were executives, and $2.8\%$ were top executives. The mean age was 41.3 $(SD = 9.7)$ . The majority of respondents $(91.9\%)$ had completed a university degree. 

# Measures

Time 1. Future self complementarity and conflict were measured as in Study 1b. To reduce the demands placed on participants, we set the maximum number of representations they could select to 20 and presented possible representations grouped by category. Future self salience (five items, $\alpha = 0.91$ ) was assessed as in Study 1b above, and career identity (three items, $\alpha = 0.87$ ) and future orientation (three items, $\alpha = 0.60$ ), the most important correlates of future selves, were assessed with the three-item measures by Strauss et al. (2012; study 1b in their paper). Vitality ( $\alpha = 0.90$ ) was assessed with the three items by Porath et al. (2012) that had the highest factor loadings in their study of a sample of professionals. A sample item was "At work, I feel alive and vital". 

Time 2. Career adaptability (24 items, $\alpha = 0.91$ ) and proactive career behavior (9 items, $\alpha = 0.84$ ) were assessed with the same measures as in Study 1b. 

# Results and Discussion

Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations between study variables are shown in Table S5.1 in Online Supplement S5. We tested our hypotheses using hierarchical linear regressions, controlling for age, future self salience, career identity, future orientation, the size of the network, and future self conflict. We included dummy controls for organizations and controlled for participants' hierarchical level because opportunities for skill development and networking likely vary across organizational contexts and ranks. We dropped four observations due to list-wise deletion for missing data. 

The results are shown in Table 2. As predicted, future self complementarity was significantly related to career adaptability $B = 0.24$ , standard error $(SE) = 0.07$ , $t = 3.63$ , $p < 0.001$ and proactive career behavior $B = 0.28$ , $SE = 0.07$ , $t = 3.83$ , $p < 0.001$ , assessed two weeks later, after controlling for established predictors. 

These results provide further support for Hypotheses 1 and 3. For a one-standard-deviation increase in future self complementarity, career adaptability is expected to increase by approximately 0.08 units (equivalent to a 0.14-SD increase), and proactive career behavior is expected to increase by approximately 0.10 units (equivalent to a 0.15-SD increase). We compared these effect sizes with those of the established predictors included in our models: For a one-standard-deviation increase in career identity, career adaptability increased by ca. 0.04 units and proactive career behavior by ca. 0.18 units; for a one-standard-deviation increase in future self salience, career adaptability increased by ca. 0.11 units and proactive career behavior by ca. 0.10 units. Thus, the effect sizes of future self complementarity fall within a range comparable to those of established predictors. 

To test the mediation hypotheses, we used the PROCESS macro (Hayes 2022) using 10,000 bootstrap estimates. Hypotheses 2 and 4 proposed an indirect effect of future self complementarity (Time 1) via vitality (Time 1) on career adaptability (Time 2) and proactive career behavior (Time 2), respectively. Future self complementarity was significantly related to vitality $B = 0.22$ , $SE = 0.10$ , $t = 2.34$ , $p = 0.02$ . There was no support for an indirect effect of future self complementarity on career adaptability via vitality $B = 0.013$ , $95\%$ confidence interval (CI) [−0.002, 0.035]); thus, Hypothesis 2 was not supported. However, future self complementarity had an indirect effect on proactive career behavior via vitality $B = 0.03$ , $95\%$ CI [0.002, 0.073]), supporting Hypothesis 4. 

Study 2 provided support for the relationship of future self complementarity with career adaptability and proactive career behavior and for vitality as a key mechanism in the relationship between future self complementarity and proactive career behavior. This suggests that individuals with a more complementary future self experience higher levels of energy, which they are able to invest in proactive career behavior. There was no indirect effect of future self complementarity on career adaptability via vitality, suggesting that mechanisms other than energy translate complementarity into the self-regulatory strengths of concern, control, curiosity, and confidence. 